Attempt to convert MSC2324 (facilitating early releases of implementations) to reality (#2433)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: specification/proposals_intro.rst

Obsolete                         obsolete                       A proposal which has been made obsolete by another proposal or decision elsewhere.
===============================  =============================  ====================================

Implementing a proposal
-----------------------

As part of the proposal process the spec core team will require evidence of the MSC
working in order for it to move into FCP. This can usually be a branch/pull request
to whichever implementation of choice that proves the MSC works in practice, though
in some cases the MSC itself will be small enough to be considered proven. Where it's
unclear if a MSC will require an implementation proof, ask in `#matrix-spec:matrix.org
<https://matrix.to/#/#matrix-spec:matrix.org>`_.

> Early adoption of a MSC/idea

Reviewer: s/early adoption/early release?

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To help facilitate early releases of software dependent on a spec release, implementations
are required to use the following process to ensure that the official Matrix namespace
is not cluttered with development or testing data.

.. Note::

>    Proof of concept implementations that are solely left on a branch/unreleased and for

Reviewer: s/and// ?

Reviewer: bump

   demonstrating that a particular MSC works do not have to follow this. Note that the

>    ``develop`` branch adopted by some projects is still subject to this process.

Reviewer: clarify "this process": the stuff below, or proof-of-concept-on-a-branch?

tbh I think this sentence about `develop` confuses more than it clarifies: *obviously* if a project's primary branch is develop it has to follow the early-adoption process.

Author: it's more just trying to clarify that Riot's develop branch counts, even though releases happen from master. Probably fine though

Reviewer: still think this needs clarifying

Author: sorry, "probably fine though" was meant to be agreement to remove the sentence.

The process for an implementation willing to be ahead of a spec release is:

1. Have an idea for a feature.
2. Implement the feature using unstable endpoints, vendor prefixes, and unstable
   feature flags as appropriate.

   * When using unstable endpoints, they MUST include a vendor prefix. For example:
     `/_matrix/client/unstable/com.example/login`. Vendor prefixes throughout Matrix
     always use the Java package naming convention. The MSC for the feature should
     identify which preferred vendor prefix is to be used by early adopters.

>    * Unstable endpoints **do not** inherit from stable (e.g. `/r0`) APIs. Implementations

Reviewer: I think it would be good to clarify what is meant by "do not inherit" here.

s/unstable endpoints/unstable namespaces/ I think? We're saying that the fact that `/r0/sync` exists does not imply that `/unstable/com.example/sync` exists, rather than anything about the implied relationship between `/r0/sync` and `/unstable/com.example/sync`?

Alternatively, miss out the sentence. It's kinda obvious to me; ymmv.

Author: It's bidirectional. `/unstable/com.example` does not inherit from `/r0/sync` (unless the MSC happens to say so with language like 'add X to sync response'), and it might not even exist if the feature doesn't call for it.

It was not obvious when we were discussing it, and members of the community were a bit surprised that we did this so I think it's good to mention.

Reviewer: ok well, can you clarify what this means?

Author: I can try, but words are hard to write here. Does my comment at least make sense?

Reviewer: It makes grammatical sense, but it feels like one of those sentences that raises more questions than it answers.

How about:

> Note that unstable namespaces do not automatically inherit endpoints from stable namespaces: for example, the fact that `/_matrix/client/r0/sync` exists does not imply that `/_matrix/client/unstable/com.example/sync` exists.

Though perhaps I'm missing a subtlety here?

     cannot assume that a particular endpoint will exist in the unstable namespace

>      even if the server advertises support for the feature.

Reviewer: surely if the server advertises support for `com.example.login` then the client can assume that `/_matrix/client/unstable/com.example/login` exists, and this is the point of the next bullet point? Or am I misunderstanding what you are trying to say here?

Author: I think it's trying to reinforce the previous sentence, but doing a crap job of it. Will just remove it.

Reviewer: bump

   * If the client needs to be sure the server supports the feature, an unstable
     feature flag that MUST be vendor prefixed is to be used. This kind of flag shows
     up in the ``unstable_features`` section of ``/versions`` as, for example,
     ``com.example.new_login``. The MSC for the feature should identify which preferred
     feature flag is to be used by early adopters.
   * When using this approach correctly, the implementation can ship/release the
     feature at any time, so long as the implementation is able to accept the technical
     debt that results from needing to provide adequate backwards and forwards

>      compatibility. The implementation MUST support the flag disappearing and be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     compatibility. The implementation MUST support the flag (and server-side implementation) disappearing and be
```

Author: it might not be solely server-side, but this is fine enough I think.

     generally safe for users. Note that implementations early in the MSC review
     process may also be required to provide backwards compatibility with earlier
     editions of the proposal.
   * If the implementation cannot support the technical debt (or if it's impossible
     to provide forwards/backwards compatibility - e.g. a user authentication change
     which can't be safely rolled back), the implementation should not attempt to

>      implement the feature and instead wait for a spec release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     implement the feature and should instead wait for a spec release.
```

>    * If at any point the idea changes, the feature flag should also change so that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * If at any point after early release, the idea changes in a backwards-incompatible way, the feature flag should also change so that
```

Author: The second half of the suggestion: sure. The first half: no. We might not be aware of implementations, so if someone goes out and implements and MSC but the author decides it needs to change all the camelCase to underscores then the flag should change regardless.

Reviewer: that would be backwards-incompatible, though?

Author: I guess so...

     implementations can adapt as needed.

3. In parallel, or ahead of implementation, open an MSC and solicit review per above.
4. Before FCP can be called, the Spec Core Team will require evidence of the MSC
   working as proposed. A typical example of this is an implementation of the MSC,
   though the implementation does not need to be shipped anywhere and can therefore
   avoid the forwards/backwards compatibility concerns mentioned here.

> 5. FCP is gone through, and assuming nothing is flagged the MSC lands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. FCP is completed, and assuming nothing is flagged the MSC lands.
```

Author: not sure this is any more accurate. FCP is a process and isn't a simple 'you did it!'.

Reviewer: I'm not saying it's more accurate, but "is gone through" feels like very awkward phrasing. Can we compromise on "The FCP process is completed"?

   still be used.
9. A transition period of about 2 months starts immediately after the spec release,
   before implementations start to loudly encourage other implementations to switch
   to stable endpoints. For example, a server implementation should start asking
   client implementations to support the stable endpoints 2 months after the spec
   release, if they haven't already. The same applies in the reverse: if clients
   cannot switch to stable prefixes because server implementations haven't started
   supporting the new spec release, some noise should be raised in the general direction
   of the implementation.

     * Please be considerate when being noisy to implementations. A gentle reminder
       in their issue tracker is generally good enough.

.. Note::
   MSCs MUST still describe what the stable endpoints/feature looks like with a note
   towards the bottom for what the unstable feature flag/prefixes are. For example,
   a MSC would propose `/_matrix/client/r0/new/endpoint`, not `/_matrix/client/unstable/
   com.example/new/endpoint`.

In summary:

* Implementations MUST NOT use stable endpoints before the MSC is in the spec. This

>   includes NOT using stable endpoints before a spec release happens, but after FCP has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  includes NOT using stable endpoints in the period between completion of FCP and release of the spec.
```

opened, even if not the focus for the time being, as they can still make progress and
even be merged without the Spec Core Team focusing on them specifically.

Implementing a proposal
-----------------------

As part of the proposal process the spec core team will require evidence of the MSC
working in order for it to move into FCP. This can usually be a branch/pull request
to whichever implementation of choice that proves the MSC works in practice, though
in some cases the MSC itself will be small enough to be considered proven. Where it's
unclear if a MSC will require an implementation proof, ask in `#matrix-spec:matrix.org
<https://matrix.to/#/#matrix-spec:matrix.org>`_.

Early release of a MSC/idea
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To help facilitate early releases of software dependent on a spec release, implementations
are required to use the following process to ensure that the official Matrix namespace
is not cluttered with development or testing data.

.. Note::

>    Proof of concept implementations that are solely left on a branch/unreleased for
>    demonstrating that a particular MSC works do not have to follow this.

Reviewer: hrrrm this is still pretty unreadable.

```suggestion
   Unreleased implementations (including proofs-of-concept demonstrating that a
   particular MSC works) do not have to follow this process.
```

> The process for an implementation willing to be ahead of a spec release is:
> 

Reviewer: since the process below describes steps for both impls which want to release early, and those which do not (in particular, note the bullet starting "If the implementation cannot support the technical debt ..."), I don't think this is clear. I think it's redundant anyway (the introductory paragraph talks about what the process is for).

```suggestion
```

1. Have an idea for a feature.
2. Implement the feature using unstable endpoints, vendor prefixes, and unstable
   feature flags as appropriate.

   * When using unstable endpoints, they MUST include a vendor prefix. For example:

>      `/_matrix/client/unstable/com.example/login`. Vendor prefixes throughout Matrix

Reviewer: This is RST...

```suggestion
     ``/_matrix/client/unstable/com.example/login``. Vendor prefixes throughout Matrix
```

   avoid the forwards/backwards compatibility concerns mentioned here.
5. The FCP process is completed, and assuming nothing is flagged the MSC lands.
6. A spec PR is written to incorporate the changes into Matrix.
7. A spec release happens.
8. Implementations switch to using stable prefixes (e.g.: ``/r0``) if the server
   supports the specification version released. If the server doesn't advertise the
   specification version, but does have the feature flag, unstable prefixes should
   still be used.
9. A transition period of about 2 months starts immediately after the spec release,
   before implementations start to loudly encourage other implementations to switch
   to stable endpoints. For example, a server implementation should start asking
   client implementations to support the stable endpoints 2 months after the spec
   release, if they haven't already. The same applies in the reverse: if clients
   cannot switch to stable prefixes because server implementations haven't started
   supporting the new spec release, some noise should be raised in the general direction
   of the implementation.

>      * Please be considerate when being noisy to implementations. A gentle reminder
>        in their issue tracker is generally good enough.

Reviewer: I'm not sure the formatting here is correct.

```suggestion
   * Please be considerate when being noisy to implementations. A gentle reminder
     in their issue tracker is generally good enough.
```

Reviewer: this does feel like a bit of a contradiction to the paragraph above: "implementations start to *loudly* encourage other implementations" (my emphasis). :man_shrugging:

Author: The formatting is correct, though the wording is redundant. Much of this is taken directly from the MSC/workshop - will try to clarify it.
